--- Page 1 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
BASIC FIRST AID
MANUAL
(English)
Expose to biological hazards
The primary survey
Basic Measures for First Aid
Cardiac Arrest & the chain of survival
Foreign Body Airway Obstruction (choking)
Bleeding
Fractures
Burns
First Aid for Bites and Stings
Poisoning
Drowning
STATE DISASTER MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
MEGHALAYA , SHILLONG
Phone No and Fax : 0364-2503022 | 0364-2502098
State Disaster ManagEemmaeinl t: Aeou. tshdomriaty –meg@nic .in A

--- Page 2 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
BASIC FIRST AID
MANUAL
STATE DISASTER MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
MEGHALAYA , SHILLONG
Phone No and Fax :0364-2503022 | 0364-2502098
Email : eo. sdma –meg@nic .in
State Disaster Management Authority B State Disaster Management Authority C

--- Page 3 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
Content
Page no
Preface i
Letter from the office of DHS (MI)
Shillong ii
Chapter I Introduction 1
Chapter II Expose to biological hazards 3
Chapter III The primary survey 7
Chapter IV Basic Measures for First Aid 10
Chapter V Cardiac Arrest & the chain of survival 25
Chapter VI Foreign Body Airway Obstruction
(choking ) 30
Chapter VII Bleeding 35
Chapter VIII Fractures 39
Chapter IX Burns 46
Chapter X First Aid for Bites and Stings 49
Chapter XI Poisoning 61
Chapter XII Drowning 64
State Disaster Management Authority D State Disaster Management Authority E

--- Page 4 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
PREFACE
First Aid is the emergency care given to the sick, injured
or wounded before being treated by medical personnel
.Injuries can be sustained by anyone and at anytime .The
basic knowledge of First Aid will be a great help to anyone
in times of need and the first aider will be able to provide
urgent and immediate life savings assistance to the victims.
It is a common experience that medical personnel
may not always be readily available at any time and place
and non-medical services providers will have to rely on their
skills and knowledge of life sustaining methods to survive in
a situation. The booklet on “Basic First Aid and Manual”
which is the first of such publication prepared by Meghalaya
State Disaster Management Authority and funded by
National Disaster Management Authority, New Delhi, I
am sure will help in providing basic knowledge to the First
Responder and thus enhance the capacity in rendering
services and assistance to the victims before the arrival of
Emergency Medical Services provider.
The booklet has been recommended for use the First
Responder by the Director of Health Service (Medical
Institutions), Meghalaya, Shillong. Any suggestion for
improvement of this booklet is welcome.
Dated Shillong H. B. Marak
the 15th April , 2014 Executive Officer
Meghalaya State Disaster
Management Authority
Shillong
Email :eo.sdma-meg@nic.in
State Disaster Management Authority i

--- Page 5 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR OF HEALTH SERVICES Chapter I - Introduction
MEGHALAYA :: SHILLONG.
The primary focus of first aid training is to provide
NO. HSM/DM/6/11/61/ Dated Shillong the 1/4/14. you with the skills and knowledge necessary to minimize the
effects of accidents or illness. First aider provide a primary
To, response to emergencies within the community and may
The Chief Executive Officer sometimes be the first and the only person on the scene,
State Disaster Management Authority Secretariat
it is necessary for him/her to remain calm, he should be
Meghalaya, Shillong
able to make the right decision in a situation dominated by
Sub: Basic First Aid Manual emotional stress and anxiety.
Definition of First Aid :
With reference to the subject cited above, I am to say
that after going through the Basic First Aid Manual, it is
First Aid is an emergency care and treatment of a sick
found that the contents are suitable for the purpose.
or injured person before more advanced medical assistance,
in the form of the emergency medical services (EMS) arrives.
Responsibilities of a first aider :
Preserve life and provide initial emergency care and
Joint Director of Health Services (MI),
treatment to sick or injured people
Meghalaya, Shillong.
l Protect the unconscious
l Prevent a casualty’s condition from becoming worse
l Promote the recovery of the casualty.
State Disaster Management Authority ii State Disaster Management Authority 1

--- Page 6 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
Philosophy of First Aid : Chapter II –Exposure to Biological hazards
In the pre-hospital setting, the key contributors to
First aider may be exposed to biological substances
survival and recovery from illness and injury are prompt and
such as blood-borne pathogens and communicable diseases,
effective maintenance of the body’s primary functions:
whilst dealing with a victim.
l Airway
These may result from dealing with:
l Breathing
l Trauma related injuries
l Circulation
l Resuscitation
l Bleeding control (life threatening)
There are many different blood-borne pathogens that
Medical research data suggests that effective support can be transmitted from a penetrating injury or mucous
of these basic functions provides the most significant exposure, in particular, Hepatitis B virus, Hepatitis C
contributor to positive outcomes for casualties in the pre- Virus and Human Immune deficiency Virus (HIV). Other
hospital setting. diseases not found in human blood may be carried in fluids
such as saliva (e.g. Hepatitis A and the organism that cause
meningitis) or animal blood and fluid.
Universal Precautions:
First aiders should equip themselves with the use of
personal protective equipment (PPE). This equipment is
used to minimize infection from disease.
State Disaster Management Authority 2 State Disaster Management Authority 3

--- Page 7 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
Exposure sources: Universal Precaution include:
The following are common sources of exposure: l Wearing appropriate protective equipment for the
task
l All human body fluids and secretions, especially
any fluid with visible blood l Treating all person as if infectious
l Any other human material l Washing following completion of task
Exposure Routes: l Appropriate disposal of disposal protective items
and/or equipments
The following are typically means of exposure:
l Maintaining good hygiene practices before, during
l Punctures or cuts from sharp objects contaminated
and after tasks involving contamination risk.
with blood/fluid
Immediate action at scene following exposure:
l A spill of blood/fluid onto mucous membranes of
the eyes, mouth and/or nose For an open wound
l A spill of blood/fluid onto skin that may or may not l Encourage the wound to bleed, thoroughly wash
be intact with water for 15 minutes and dress
l A laceration and contaminated with blood/fluid l Do not attempt to use a caustic solution to clean the
from a bite wound
The expression ‘universal precaution’ refers to the risk l Seek medical advice as soon as possible
management strategy used of communicable disease, by
For a splash to a mucous membrane
reducing contact with blood and other body substances.
l Flush splashes to nose, mouth or eyes thoroughly
with water for 15 minutes
State Disaster Management Authority 4 State Disaster Management Authority 5

--- Page 8 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
l If the splash is in the mouth, spit out and thoroughly Chapter III- The Primary survey
rinse out with water for 15 minutes
Basic of First Aid
l If the splash is in the eyes, irrigate with the eyes
Most injured or ill service members are able to return
open for 15 minutes
to their units to fight or support primarily because they are
l Seek medical advice as soon as possible
given appropriate and timely first aid followed by the best
For a splash to the skin medical care possible. Therefore, all services members must
remember the basics.
l At the scene, wash thoroughly with soap and water
l Check for BREATHING: Lack of oxygen intake
l Seek medical advice as soon as possible if the
(through a , brain damage or death in few minutes
exposure is medium/high risk.
l Check for BLEEDING: Life cannot continue
without an adequate volume of blood to carry
oxygen to tissues
l Check for SHOCK: Unless shock is prevented, first
aid performed, and medical treatment provided,
death may result even though the injury would not
otherwise be fatal
EMERGENCY ACTION PRINCIPLES
1. Survey the scene
Once you recognized that an emergency has occurred
and decide to act, you must make sure the scene of the
State Disaster Management Authority 6 State Disaster Management Authority 7

--- Page 9 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
emergency is safe for you, the victim/s, and any bystander/s. 1. Check for consciousness
Element of the Survey of the Scene 2. Check for airway
l Scene safely 3. Check for breathing
l Mechanism of injury or nature of illness 4. Check for circulation
l Determine the number of patients and additional 4. Do a Secondary Survey of the Victim
resources.
It is a systematic method of gathering additional
2. Activate Medical Assistance and Transfer Facility information about injuries or conditions that may need care.
In some emergencies, you will have enough time to call l Interview the victim
for specific medical advice before administering first aid. But
l Check vital signs
in some situations, you will need to attend to the victim first.
l Perform head-to-toe examination.
Phone First and Phone Fast
Both trained and untrained bystanders should be
instructed to Activate Medical Assistance as soon as they
have determined that an adult victim requires emergency
care “Phone First”. While for infant and children a “Phone
fast” approach is recommended.
3. Do a Primary of the Victim
In every emergency situation, you must first find out if
there are conditions that are an immediate threat the victim’s
life.
State Disaster Management Authority 8 State Disaster Management Authority 9

--- Page 10 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
Chapter IV –Basic Measures For First Aid to swallow or cough out foreign material in the airway. This
may cause airway obstruction, or laryngeal irritation and
Lack of breathing and excessive loss of blood
foreign material may enter the lungs. For this reason the
(circulation) . A casualty without a clear airway or who is not
rescuer should not given an unconscious victim anything by
breathing may die from lack of oxygen. Excessive loss of blood
mouth, and should not attempt to induce vomiting.
may lead to shock, and shock can lead to death; therefore, you
Key point:
must act immediately to control the loss of blood. All wounds
are considered to be contaminated, since infection-producing In an unconscious victim, care of the airway takes
organism (germs) are always present on the skin and clothing, precedence over any injury, including the possibilities of
and in the soil, water, and air. Any missile or instrument (such spinal injury. Airway management is high priority. It is
as bullet, shrapnel, knife, or bayonet) causing a wound pushes important to check the airway before the breathing. If air
or carries germs into that wound. Infection results as these cannot enter the lungs due to some sort of blockage, the
organism multiply. That a wound is contaminated does not casualty will not survive for long.
lessen the importance of protecting it from further as soon as
Airway management is required to provide an open
possible to prevent further contamination
airway when the victim:
OPEN THE AIRWAY AND RESTORE BREATHING
l Is unconscious;
When a victim is unconscious, all muscles are relaxed.
l Has an obstructed airway;
If the victim is left on the back, the tongue, which is attached
to the back of the jaw, falls against the back wall of the throat l Needs rescue breathing.
and blocks air from entering the lungs. Other soft tissues
Always obstruction:
of the airway may worsen this obstruction. The mouth falls
If during resuscitation the airway becomes
open but this tend to block, rather than open, the airway. The
compromised, the victim should be promptly rolled onto
unconscious victim is further a risk because of being unable
State Disaster Management Authority 10 State Disaster Management Authority 11

--- Page 11 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
their side to clear the airway. The victim should then be l Finger sweep (only if an object can be seen and can
reassessed for responsiveness and normal breathing. Most removed with a sweep of a gloved finger)
airway problems are caused by the tongue and/or vomit.
l Perform a “Head-tilt, chin-lift”.
These can often be resolved by simple airway management.
Head-tilt, chin-lift:
Tongue:
Adults and children (a
The muscle tone of the upper airway is directly
child is define as one
related to the responsiveness: when sleeping, for example;
year to eight years of
minor degree of reduced muscle tone may lead to sufficient
age).
obstruction to cause snoring. When unresponsive, however,
this obstruction can become complete and fatal. One hand is placed on
the forehead or the top
Vomit:
of the head. The other hand is used to provide chin lift. The
Foot remains in our stomach for hours, so most head is tilted backwards without placing your hand under
victims will have food in their stomachs, and it is possible the neck. It is important to avoid excessive force, especially
for this food to regurgitate up from the stomach into the where neck injury is suspected. Make sure that you are
lungs. This is called aspiration. The acidity of the stomach wearing barrier gloves.
contents and the particles size can block and damage the
Chin lift is common used in conjunction with
airway. Regurgitation is a passive process caused by a rise
Backward head Tilt.
in stomach pressure overcoming the sphincter. It is usually
The chin is held up by
caused by a full gut, obesity, (weight on the stomach) or air.
the rescuer’s thumb and
How to check an Airway: fingers in order to open
the mouth and pull the
l Open the mouth and look for foreign objects
tongue and soft tissues
State Disaster Management Authority 12 State Disaster Management Authority 13

--- Page 12 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
away from the back of the throat. One technique involves supported at the point of the chin with the mouth maintained
placing the thumb over the chin below the lip and supporting open. There must be no pressure on the soft tissues of the neck.
the tip of the jaw with the middle finger and the index finger If these manoeuvres do not provide a clear airway, the head may
along the jaw lines. Care is required to prevent the ring finger be tilted backwards very gently with gentle movement.
from compressing the soft tissues of the neck. The jaw is held
Breathing:
open slightly and pulled away from the chest.
Normal breathing is essential for maintaining life.
Finger sweep:
Victims who are gasping or breathing abnormally and are
The finger is used to clear the mouth of fluid and unresponsive require resuscitation
debris in the unresponsive casualty. It should only be
Causes of absent or ineffective breathing:
performed if you can see something to remove. It should
always be performed with a gloved hand with the casualty l Direct depression of/or damage to the breathing
positioned on their side in a stable side position. Insert your control centre of the brain
first finger into the high into the side of the casualty’s mouth
l Upper airway obstruction
and perform a single sweeping motion to the opposite side,
l Paralysis or impairment of the nerves and/or
flicking out vomit, blood, and debris.
muscles of breathing
Infants: An infant is define as younger than one year.
l Problems affecting the lungs
The upper airway in infants is easily to obstructed because
l Drowning
of the narrow nasal passages, the entrance to the windpipe
(vocal cords) and the trachea (windpipe). The trachea is soft l Suffocation
and pliable and may be distorted by excessive head tilt.
Signs in effective breathing may include:
Therefore, in infants the head should be kept neutral and
l Little or unusual chest movement
maximum head tilt should not be used. The lower jaw should be
State Disaster Management Authority 14 State Disaster Management Authority 15

--- Page 13 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
l Weak or abnormal breath sounds (wheezing, etc.) victim’s slightly open mouth. Whilst maintaining an open
airway pinch the nostril (or seal nostrils with rescuer cheeks)
l Occasionally gasps
and blow to inflate the victim’s lungs.
l Reduced responsiveness
Because the hand supporting the head comes forward
l Anxiety
some head tilt may be lost and their airway may be obstructed.
l Unusual skin colour (pallor)
Pulling upwards (with the hand on the chin) helps to
l Rapid or slow breathing reduce this problem. For mouth to mouth ventilation, it is
reasonable to give each breath in a short time (one second)
l Unusual posture
with a volume to achieve chest rise regardless of the cause of
How to check for breathing:
collapse. Care should be taken not to over-inflate the chest.
The rescuer should-
Look for rise of the victim’s chest whilst inflating. If the
l LOOK for movement of the upper abdomen or
chest does not rise, possible causes are:
lower chest
l Obstruction in the airway (inadequate head tilt,
l LISTEN for the escape of air from nose and mouth
chin lift, tongue, or foreign body)
l FEEL for breath on the side of your face / movement
l Insufficient air-being blown into the lungs
of the chest and upper abdomen.
l Inadequate air seal around mouth and or nose
l THIS SHOULD TAKE YOU NO LONGER THAN
10 SECONDS.
If the chest does not rise, ensure correct head tilt,
Rescue breaths: adequate air seal and ventilation. Following inflation of the
lungs, lift your mouth from your victim’s mouth, turn your
Kneel beside the victim’s head. Maintained an open
head towards the victim’s chest and listen and feel for air
airways. Use resuscitation barrier devise. Take a breath,
being exhaled from the mouth and nose.
open your mouth as widely as possible and place it over the
State Disaster Management Authority 16 State Disaster Management Authority 17

--- Page 14 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
Mouth and nose: C-Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR)
The mouth to nose method may be used where the EFFECTIVE CPR-30 compression followed by 2 breathes
rescuer chooses to, the victim’s jaws are tightly clenched, or
CRP is a repetitive cycle of:
when resuscitating infants and small children. The technique
for mouth to nose is the same as for mouth to mouth except 1. Airway opening
for sealing the airway. Close the victim’s mouth with the
2. Chest compression
hand supporting the jaw and push the lips together with the
3. Rescue breathing
thumb. Use a resuscitation barrier devise.
External chest compression is the most effective way
Take a breath and place your widely opened mouth
of artificially circulating blood. Chest compression are
over the victim’s nose (or mouth and nose in infants) and
accompanied by rescue breathing which provides oxygen
blow to inflate the victim’s lungs. Lift your mouth from the
that the blood delivers around the body to its vital organs.
victim’s nose and look for the fall of the chest, listen and feel
This is the only way to keep the heart and brain oxygenated
for the escape of air from the nose and mouth. If the chest
until a defibrillator arrives.
does not move, there is an obstruction, an ineffective seal, or
insufficient air being blown into the lungs.
Recognition of the need for chest comparison:
In mouth to nose resuscitation, a leak may occur if
First Aider should use unresponsiveness and absence
the rescuer’s mouth is not open sufficiently, or if the victim’s
of normal breathing to identify the need for resuscitation.
mouth is not sealed adequately. If this problem persists, use
Feeling for a pulse is unreliable and should not be performed
mouth to mouth resuscitation. It may be found that blockage
to confirm the need for resuscitation.
of the nose prevents adequate inflation. If this occurs, mouth
When should CPR be performed?
to mouth resuscitation should be used.
CPR should be performed on casualties who are not
breathing or responsiveness and breathing inadequately.
State Disaster Management Authority 18 State Disaster Management Authority 19

--- Page 15 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
Sometimes a casualty suffering a cardiac arrest may casualty is breathing, place them into the recovery position
occasionally gasp, but this not constitute breathing. and monitor continuously.
When not to perform CPR: CPR uninterruptedly until one or more of the following
happens:
You should not perform CPR:
l The casualty recovers responsiveness and is able to
l When it is too dangerous to rescuers
breathe on their own
l When there are obvious signs of death, for example
l You are placed at significant risk
rigor mortis
l You cannot continue due to exhaustion
l When the casualty’s injuries are clearly too severe
for survival l Advanced help arrives and takes over the care of the
casualty
Complications:
Compression only CPR:
Broken ribs are not uncommon during CPR. If
this occurs, check your hand position and continue. You If rescuer’s are unwilling or unable to do rescue
can reduce the chance of breaking ribs by placing and by breathing they should not do chest compressions only. If
avoiding excessive force during compressions. Broken ribs chest compressions only are given, they should be continuous
will decrease the effectiveness of the chest compression in at a rate of approximately 100 per minute.
generating blood flow, but this cannot always be avoided.
Locating the site for chest compressions:
Reassessment:
There is insufficient evidence for or against specific hand
After every two minutes of CPR, reassess for signs of position for chest compressions during CPR. For a victim
life (coughing, breathing, or movement). This should take no receiving chest compressions, place your hands on the lower
longer than 10 seconds. If the casualty begins to show signs half of the sternum. Rescuers should place the heel of their
of life during CPR, reassess the breathing immediately. If the hand in the centre of the chest with the other hand on the top.
State Disaster Management Authority 20 State Disaster Management Authority 21

--- Page 16 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
Avoid compressions beyond the lower limit of the allow complete recoil of the chest after each compression.
sternum. Compressions applied too high is ineffective and,
Depth of compression:
if applied too low may cause regurgitating and/or damage to
The lower half of the sternum should be depressed
the internal organs.
approximately one third of the depth of the chest with each
Method of compressions:
compression.
Children and adults
This should equate to more than 5cm in adults,
l Two hand techniques is used for performing chest approximately 5cm in children and 4 cm in infants.
compressions in adults
Rate of chest compression:
l One hand technique is used to performed chest
Rescuers should perform chest compressions for all
compressions on children under 8 yrs old.
ages at a rate of approximately 100 compressions per minute
Infant: (almost two compressions per second). This does not imply
that 100 compressions will be delivered each minute, since
In infant the two finger technique should be used by
the number will be reduced by interruptions for breathe
lay rescuers to transfer time from compression to ventilation.
given by rescue breathing.
Having obtained the compression point the rescuer places two
finger on this point and compresses the chest. Interruption CPR equality:
to chest compressions must be minimized
When performing compressions, if feasible, change
Infants requiring chest compressions should be rescuers at least every two minutes, to prevent rescuer
placed on their back on a firm surfaces (e.g. table or floor) fatigue and deterioration in chest compressions quality
to optimize the effectiveness of compressions. Compression (particularly depth). Changing rescuers performing chest
should be rhythmic with equal time for compressions and compressions should be done with minimal interruptions to
relaxation. The rescuer must avoid either rocking backwards the compressions.
or forwards, or using thumps or quick jabs. Rescuer should
State Disaster Management Authority 22 State Disaster Management Authority 23

--- Page 17 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
State Disaster Management Authority 24 State Disaster Management Authority 25
tnafni
dlihc
tludA
tnenopmoc
llikS
ni
sregnfi
eerht
ro
owT
retnec
ni
sdnah
owT
ertnec
ni
sdnah
owT
noitisop
dnaH
rewol
no(
tsehc
fo
retnec
flah
rewol
no(
tsehc
fo
flah
rewol
no(
tsehc
fo
tsuj
,munrets
eht
fo
flah
)munrets
fo
)munrets
fo
)
enil
elppin
woleb
-nu
sehcni
flah
1
tuobA
litnu
sehcni
2 tuobA
.sehcni
2 tsael
tA
-serpmoc
tsehC
tuoba(
sesir
tsehc
eht
lit
sesir
ylraelc
tsehc
eht
ylraelc
tsehc
eht
litnU
eucser
snois
)htaerb
rep
dnoces
1
rep
dnoces
1 tuoba(
dnoces
1
tuoba(
sesir
shtaerb
)htaerb
)htaerb
rep
noisserpmoc
tsehc
03
noisserpmoc
tsehc
03
noisserpmoc
tsehc
03
elcyC
htaerb
eucser
owt
dna
htaerb
eucser
owt
dna
htaerb
eucser
owt
dna
noisserpmoc
tsehc
03
noisserpmoc
tsehc
03
noisserpmoc
tsehc
03
etaR
ta
(sdnoces
81
tuoba
ni
(sdnoces
81
tuoba
ni
(sdnoces
81
tuoba
ni
noisserpmoc
001
tsael
-serpmoc
001
tsael
ta
-serpmoc
001
tsael
ta
)etunim
rep
)etunim
rep
nois
)etunim
rep
nois
Chapter V- Cardiac Arrest & the chain of
Survival
Cardiac arrest occurs when the heart is no longer able
to effectively pump blood around the body. If not treated, this
will cause death within minutes. One of the consequences of
cardiac arrest is the disruption of the electrical activation of
the heart. When this happen, the heart muscle can rapidly
contract in an uncoordinated fashion. This rhythm is called
Ventricular fibrillation (VF). While a heart attack is the
most common cause of cardiac arrest, it is not the only cause
and the majority of people who suffer a heart attack do not
have cardiac arrest.
The following signals of a heart attacked for prompt action
on time:
l Chest pain, discomfort or pressure. The most
common signal is persistent pain, discomfort or
pressure in the chest that lasts longer than 3 to 5
minutes or goes away and comes back.
l Unfortunately, it is not always easy to distinguish
heart attack pain from the pain of indigestion,
muscle spasms or other condition. This often causes
people to delay getting medical care. Brief, stabbing

--- Page 18 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
pain or pain that gets worse when you bend or much needed oxygen to the heart. The person may
breathe deeply usually is not caused by a heart have noisy breathing or shortness of breath
problem the pain associated with a heart attack can
Other signals.
range from discomfort to an unbearable crushing
The person’s skin may be pale or ashen (gray),
sensation in the chest.
especially around the face. Some people suffering from a heart
l The person may describes it as pressure, squeezing,
attack may be damp with sweat or may sweat heavily, feel
tightness, aching, or heaviness in the chest.
dizzy, become nauseous or vomit. They may become fatigued,
l Many heart attacks start slowly as mild pain or lightheaded, or lose consciousness. These signals are caused
discomfort. by the stress put on the body when the heart does not work as
it should. Some individuals may shown no signals at all.
l Often the person feels pain or discomfort in the
center of the chest. l Differences in signal between men and women.
Both men and women experience the most common
l The pain or discomfort becomes constant. It usually
signals for a heart attack: chest pain or discomfort.
is not relieved by resting, changing, position, or
However it is important to note that women are
taking medicine.
somewhat more likely to experience some of the other
l Some individuals may show no signals at all
warning signals, particularly shortness of breath,
l Discomforts in other areas of the upper body in
nausea or vomiting, back or jaw and unexplained
addition to the chest. Discomfort, pain or pressure
fatigue or malaise. When they do experience chest
may also be felt in or spread to the shoulder, arm,
pain, women may have a greater tendency to have a
neck, jaw, stomach, or back
typical chest pain: of the breastbone
l Trouble breathing- Another signal of a heart attack l If you suspect that someone might be having a heart
is trouble breathing. The person may be breathing
attack, you should:
faster than normal because the body tries to get the
State Disaster Management Authority 26 State Disaster Management Authority 27

--- Page 19 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
l Call 108 or the local emergency no. immediately described as the adult chain and each one needs to occur
promptly to ensure survival.
l Have the person stop what he/she is doing and
rest comfortably. This will ease the heart’s need of 1. Early recognition by a bystander that a problem
oxygen. Many people experiencing a heart attack exists.
find it easier to breathe while sitting
2. Early 108 call to activate the Emergency Medical
l Loosen any tight or uncomfortable clothing Services (EMS).
l Closely watch the person until advanced medical 3. Early CPR to maintain artificial ventilation and
personnel takes over. Notice any changes in the circulation until the EMS arrives
person’s appearance or behavior. Mentor the
4. Early defibrillation to deal with the heart’s electrical
person’s condition.
problems
l Be prepared to perform CPR and use of AED, if
5. Early advanced medical care
available, if the person loses consciousness and
stops breathing
l Ask the person if he/she has a history of heart disease.
Some people with heart disease take prescribed
medication for chest pain. You can help by getting
the medication for the person and assisting him/
her with taking the prescribed medication.
The survival rate for cardiac arrest is very low in
l Offer aspirin, if medically appropriate and locally most countries, including India. It is time-critical with the
protocols allow, chances of chances of survival decreasing by about 10% for
every minute you have to wait for a defibrillator.
Adult chain of survival:
The key steps to surviving a cardiac arrest in adults are
State Disaster Management Authority 28 State Disaster Management Authority 29

--- Page 20 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
Chapter VI- Foreign Body Airway l Grasping the throat
Obstruction (choking)
l Inability to speak
l Inability to breathe
Choking is a common breathing emergency. It occurs
when the person’s airway is partially or completely blocked. l Colour of face (pallor)
If a conscious person is choking, his /her airway has been
l Inability to cough
blocked by a foreign object, such as a piece of food or a small
Treatment for choking adults and children
toy; by smelling in the mouth or throat; or by fluids; such as
vomiting. Effective cough (Partial Airway Obstruction)
Always obstruction: l A casualty with an effective cough should be given
reassurance and encouragement to keep coughing
There are two types of airway obstruction:
to expel the foreign material
Partial:
l If the obstruction is not relieved the rescuer should
l Breathing is labored; Breathing may be noisy; some
call an ambulance
escape of air can be felt from the mouth.
Ineffective cough (Severe Airway Obstruction):
Complete:
Conscious Victim
l There may be effort at breathing; there is no sound
l If the casualty is conscious, call an
of breathing; there is no escape of air from nose/ or
ambulance
mouth.
l Perform up to five sharp, back
Signs and symptoms:
blows with the heel in the middle
The indication that someone may be struggling with an
of the back between the shoulder
obstruction are:
blades. Check to see if each back
l Panic
State Disaster Management Authority 30 State Disaster Management Authority 31

--- Page 21 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
blow has relieved the airway obstruction. The aim Unconscious victim
is to relieve the obstruction with each blow rather
The finger can be used in the unconscious victim with
than to give all five blows.
an obstructed airway if solid material is visible in the airway.
Supporting the casualty/delivering back blows Commence CPR immediately!
l If back blows are unsuccessful the rescuer should
perform up to five chest thrusts. Checked to see if
each chest thrust has relieved the airway obstruction
with each chest thrust rather then to give all five
chest thrusts.
If you are alone and choking;
l To perform chest thrusts, identify the same
compression points A) Bend over and press your abdomen against any
as for CPR and give up firm objects; sach as the back of a chair.
to five chest thrusts.
B) Or, give yourself abdominal thrusts by using your
These are similar to
hands; just as you would do to another person.
chest compressions
Treating for chocking infants (less than 1 year)
but sharper and
The following procedure is for a choking infant:
delivered at a slower
Chest Thrusts rate. Children and l Check to see if the obstruction can be cleared using
adults may be treated the finger sweep
in the sitting or standing position. If the obstruction
l Lay the infant In a lying face down position over
is still not relieved, continue alternating five back
your fore arm, supporting the baby’s face and body
blows with five chest thrusts.
with your arm. The infant ‘s body should be inclined
downward to utilize the effects of gravity
State Disaster Management Authority 32 State Disaster Management Authority 33

--- Page 22 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
l Deliver up to five blows between the infant’s Chapter VII – Bleeding
shoulder blades
Bleeding is one of the most rectifiable causes of
l If the obstruction is still present, turn the infant
death trauma, therefore controlling external bleeding is
onto its back, again with the body inclined.
a main priority when administering care in a pre-hospital
l Deliver up to five chest thrusts between the infant’s
environment.
nipples (breast bone) using two fingers. Repeat this
There are three main types of blood vessels;
process until the obstruction is cleared or the infant
l Arteries
becomes unresponsive.
l Commence CPR if the infant becomes unresponsive. l Veins
l Capillaries
Internal
Bleeding is most likely to occur in the stomach, lungs,
or bowels. Blood from the lungs is coughed up; from the
stomach vomited; from the bowels it appears in the stools.
With internal bleeding, sign of restless, weakness, pallor,
thirst, and a faint, rapid pulse are usually present. In an
accident where internal bleeding may have occurred, contact
a doctor as soon as possible. While you wait, keep the patient
quiet, comfortably warm, and lying flat. Give him nothing
to drink- not even water. When moving injured person to
advanced medical facilities, only transport (if possible) in a
lying position.
State Disaster Management Authority 34 State Disaster Management Authority 35

--- Page 23 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
External Treatment
Place a pressure dressing (several layers of sterile l Carry out primary assessment, Danger
gauze) over the wound. Secure it in place firmly enough Response Send for Help, Airway Breathing CPR
to stop the bleeding or hold it in a place with firm hand (cardiopulmonary Resuscitation ) + control Major
pressure. Whenever possible, elevate the wound. Bleeding Defibrillation (DRSABCD)
Types of bleeding l Seek medical attention (make sure EMS are en
route )
Arterial bleeding will be profuse and rapid because
it is under pressure. It will be spurting as the heart beat, l Make sure there isn’t a foreign body in the wound
which will make it difficult to control and difficult for clots before applying direct pressure
to form. This bleeding will be bright red as arterial blood is
l Apply direct pressure
compromised of highly oxygenated red blood cells. Arterial
l Elevation
bleeding is a significant and life threatening blood loss.
l If unresponsive and breathing is adequate, place the
Venous bleeding is a easier to control because the
casualty in the recovery position.
blood in the veins is under less pressure, which assists
clotting. Because it carries less oxygen, venous blood is a l Carry out secondary survey
much darker red. Dangerous levels of blood loss can occur l Severe bleeding may lead to unconsciousness and
from venous bleeding. may require life support (CPR)
Capillary bleeding is the most common and easiest l Rest and reassure
to control as capillaries are closest to the surface of the skin.
Direct pressure
Blood tends to ooze rather than floe or spurt as the pressure
Direct pressure is the main treatment eased to manage
in the capillaries is very low.
bleeding:
State Disaster Management Authority 36 State Disaster Management Authority 37

--- Page 24 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
1. After checking for any foreign objects in the wound, Chapter VIII – Fracture
apply firm pressure, directly onto and into wound,
A fracture is any break in the continuity of a bone. Fractures
using large sterile trauma dressing
can cause total disability or in some cases death by serving
2. If blood soaks through the initial dressing, apply vital organs and/or arteries.
further dressing as required
Causes
Elevation
l Direct force:- fractures occurs at the site of serve
Elevate the affected area above the level of the heart, if force is applied. e.g; Bullet injury, fall on projecting
possible. stone, wheel passing over the bone.
Tourniquet : l Indirect force :- Fracture occurs away from the site
of application of force. e.g. Collarbone – due to fall
on an out stretched hand.
Types of fractures
l Open fracture these are fractures that have
punctured the skin. The bone end may have returned
and not visible, but this is still an open fracture
l Closed fracture these are fractures where the
surrounding skin remains intact.
l Complicated fractures these are fractures that
have caused damage to internal structures, such
as punctured lung, or a fractures that involves
significant bleeding
State Disaster Management Authority 38 State Disaster Management Authority 39

--- Page 25 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
l Tenderness
l Swelling or irregularity
l Shock life signs and symptoms
l Crepitus (the sound of bones grinding)
l Discolouration
l Shortening of the limb
Treatment
The steps for the management of fractures are:
l Carry out primary assessment, Danger
Signs and symptoms Response Send for Help, Airway Breathing CPR
(cardiopulmonary Resuscitation ) + control Major
A casualty experiencing a fracture may experience one or
Bleeding Defibrillation (DRSABCD)
more of the following signs and symptoms:
l Seek medical attention (make sure EMS are en
l Pain at the injury site
route)
l Bleeding (internal or external)
l Control nay external bleeding using direct pressure
l Open wounds with or without exposed bone ends
and elevation if possible
l Deformity
l For a closed fracture, ice packs maybe used to assist
l Shortening or rotation of the limb with pain relief and swelling.
l Inability to move or stand l Minimize any unnecessary movement unless for
safety reasons
l The casualty reports hearing the bone break
State Disaster Management Authority 40 State Disaster Management Authority 41

--- Page 26 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
l If the injured limb needs to be immobilized, make SPLINTING:
use of whatever you have got at hand to do so e.g.
pillows, magazines, or dressing to support limb
l Check the circulation below the fracture site
l Carry out secondary assessment
l Reset and reassure
Figure 1: Elbow Bent Figure 2: Humerus & Elbow
Straight
Immobilizing using splints:
Improvised splints:
l It can be made of card board, rolled newspaper, or
magazines, umbrella, rolled blankets, pillow, etc.
Ideal splints:
Figure 3: Knee Straight & Figure 4: Hip, femur, knee,
l It should be wide & and long to cover joints on both tibia fibula (5 bandaging tibia fibula (7 bandaging
method) method)
sides of fracture, well padded, and applied over
clothing.
l STRAIN: Injury involving tendons
l SPRAIN: Injuries involving ligaments
Dislocation: happens when a bone is moved out of its Figure 5: Knee bent Figure 6: Ankle Figure 7: Fingers
original position
Note:-
l Never try to put the Dislocated Joint Back Into Place
State Disaster Management Authority 42 State Disaster Management Authority 43

--- Page 27 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
Fractures and dislocations 7. Manual stabilization means holding the patient’s
head firmly and steadily in a neutral, in-line
l Always check P.M.S. (Pulse Motor ability and
position
Sensation) before splinting and after splinting
8. If allowed, apply a rigid cervical immobilization
l Pulse is checked by feeling artery (carotid or radial).
device to the patient
l Motor ability is to check if the casualty can moves
his fingers or toes as the case may be.
l Sensation is acquired by pinching or scratching the
palm or the soul of the feet as the case may be.
l When trying a cravat over the chest, always ask the
casualty to hold his breath.(if the casualty is conscious).
If the casualty is conscious, place two fingers below
the cravat, on top of the chest, then tie the cravat.
General rules for splinting
1. Feel for a pulse in all extremities
2. See if feet and toes can move
3. See if hands and fingers can move
4. Touch the toes to assess for sensation
5. Touch the finger for sensation
6. If the patient is unresponsive, see if he/she respond
to painful stimuli
State Disaster Management Authority 44 State Disaster Management Authority 45

--- Page 28 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
Chapter IX- Burns 3. Place sterile gauze over burned area
4. Bandage burned area snugly
Burns can be one of the most traumatic injuries to
l Large burn of any degree
deal with. The victims can be in severe pain, there can be
the smell of burnt flesh and depending on the degree of the 1. If a doctor is available within 30 minutes or less
burn, and charred clothing can be attached to the victim’s
v Treat victim for shock
flesh. The first step in dealing with burns is to determine the
v Get victim to advanced medical treatment, attempt
level of the burn. It should be realized that First and second
no treatment
degree burns can be caused by prolonged exposure to intense
sunlight. 2. If advanced medical aid is not readily (like in an
outdoor/camping/backpacking setting):
Classification of burn:
v Remove clothing from burned area. Cut around
l First degree- skin is reddened
clothing/cloth that stick to burned area
l Second degree – skin is blistered
v Apply antiseptic cream to burned area
l Third degree – skin is cook or charred, the burn
v Cover burned area with sterile dressing
may extend into the underlying tissue. In severe
cases skin or appendages may be burned off. v Bandage snugly (not too tight however )
Treatment v Treat for shock
l First degree and second degree burns, only v If victim is conscious, allow them to drink all the
covering up to about 1% (like the size of a hand ) water they desire. Commercially sport drinks are
body surfaces: even better than water if available
1. Wash/soak burned portions in cold water v Get victim as soon as possible to advanced medical
support
2. Wash burned area in soapy water
State Disaster Management Authority 46 State Disaster Management Authority 47

--- Page 29 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
Do not! Chapter X- First Aid for Bites and Stings
l Touch the burned area with fingers
People are bitten and stung everyday by insects, spiders,
l Breath on the burns
snakes, animals and marine life. Most of the time, these bites
l Break on drain blister and stings do not cause serious problems. However, in race
circumstances, certain bites and stings can cause serious
Change any dressing that have been applied. Only
illness or even death in people who are sensitive to the
advanced medical support should change or removed any
venom. Bites from humans and other animals, such as dogs,
dressing applied as first aid.
cats, bats, raccoons, and rats, can cause severe bruises and
Management (the 3 C’s ):
infection and tears or lecerations of tissues.
COOL: use tepid, flowering water for at least 20
General insect stings
minutes. Chemical burns up to an hour
1. If a stringer, removes it by scraping away or gently
CLEAR: Remove anything that may keep burning (that
isn’t sticking). Removed jewellery . Remove pulling it out with forceps.
clothing that is contaminated by chemicals.
2. Apply paste of baking soda and cold cream or use a
COVER: Preferable with a non-adherent dressing.
commercially available sting aid for topical relief of
Cling- film is ideal (if available).
mosquito and other insect bites. Calamine lotion will
also relive itching.
3. If multiple stings, or unusual reaction (i.e. excessive
reddish skin or breathing issues), or a history of severe
reaction, take victim immediately to advanced medical
support.
State Disaster Management Authority 48 State Disaster Management Authority 49

--- Page 30 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
Bed bug bites 2. After removing the stringer wash the area with soap
and water.
Description: Bedbug are flat
bodied, oval, reddish brown, 3. Apply a cool wash cloth or ice pack.
and about ¼ in size. Although
4. Some people have symptoms of severe allergic
not painful at first, bedbug bites
reactions are:
usually becomes red, swollen,
l Shortness of breath
and itchy. Reaction to bites range
l Thickening of the tongue
from mild to severe.
l Sweating
Treatment: Apply paste of baking soda and cold cream or
use a commercially available sting aid for topical relief of bed l An anaphylactic shock
bug bites.
l Seek medical help immediately if you have an
Bee & Wasp stings allergic reaction
Description: A very Chiggers
sore area that is red and
Description: it is generally visible
swollen. Usually there
only with magnification. Chiggers
is a stinger protruding
are different from mites in that they
from the skin.
feed only in the larval stage. The
chigger larvae get onto the skin and
Treatment:
move around until they meet some
1. Scrape the stinger away with the edge of a credit card,
obstacle, for example the waistband
knife blade, or thumbnail. Do not try to squeeze the
of underwear, the elastic band of
stinger out, as this will cause more bee/wasp venom
socks, etc. They then attach to the skin and begin feeding.
into the skin.
State Disaster Management Authority 50 State Disaster Management Authority 51

--- Page 31 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
The area around where they are feeding usually turns red Treatment:
with an itching sensation.
1. Apply ice pack at ten minutes intervals for a period up
Treatment: to ½ hour
1. Wash the affective area with soap and water 2. When through with ice pack treatments, apply bite
smoothing lotion such as calamine.
2. Apply a local topical hydrocortisone cream;
antihistamine, or local anesthetic cream should be l Some people have symptoms of serve allergic
applied to reduce the itching. Calamine can also be reactions which are:
used
l Shortness of breath
3. The wound must not be scratched
l Thickening of the tongue
Preventive: spray your feet and ankles with a
l Sweating
quality insect repellent. Dimenthyl phthalate
l An anaphylactic shock
or flowers of sulphur can also be used in the
l Seek medical help immediately if you have an
socks around the ankles.
allergic reaction
Fire – Ant Sting
Flea bite
Description: After
Description: usually flea bites
being stung by the
are suspected when tiny itchy red
fire ant, tiny painful
bumps appear below the knee.
red bumps appear.
After an hour or so, Treatment:
they usually change into blisters.
1. Reduce itching by applying
an ice pack
State Disaster Management Authority 52 State Disaster Management Authority 53

--- Page 32 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
2. After removing ice pack and drying skin, applying 2. Severe pain in the sting or bite
soothing lotion such as calamine
3. A blister lesion or swelling at the entry site
Mosquito bites
4. Nausea and vomiting
Description: Mosquito have a long
5. Stiff or painful joints
proboscis (snout) for sucking blood.
6. Chills or fever
They are most active in shady, low
7. Trouble breathing or swallowing or signs of anaphylaxis
lights, damp or marshy areas
8. Sweating or salivating profusely
Treatment: use sting aid for topical relief of mosquito bites
9. Muscles aches or severe abdominal or back pain,
Scorpion sting
dizziness, or fainting, chest pain, elevated heart rate,
Description: scorpions are usually
infection at the site of the bite
found in the old wooden houses,
Treatment
grasses, log etc.
l Apply an antibiotic ointment, if the person has no
Treatment :
known allergies or sensitivities to the medication,
1. Cold packs
to prevent infection
2. Get victim to advanced medical support as soon
l Bandage the wound
possible
l Apply an ice or cold pack to the site to reduce pain
Spider bites
and swelling
General signals of spider bites and
l Encourage the person to seek medical attention
scorpion stings may include
l Children and older adults may need antivenom to
1. A mark indicating a possible
block the effects of the spider’s venom
bite or sting
State Disaster Management Authority 54 State Disaster Management Authority 55

--- Page 33 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
l If you transport the person to a medical facility, crush the tick
keep the bitten area elevated and as still as possible
2. After tick removal , swab the area with iodine solution,
Ticks
3. If you cannot remove the tick, or if its mouth parts
Description : Ticks is oval with small remain embedded , get medical care .
head, the body is not divided into
4. If rash or flu-like symptoms appear (see list below ),
definite segments. Gray or brown.
get medical help immediately
Measures from ¼ inch – to ¾ inch when
l Chills and fever
mature. It can burrow into the skin.
l Pains in bones, muscles and joints.
Prevention
l Back and head aches
1. Examine body and
l Coughing, vomiting and weakness
clothes after any
exposure to tick l Rash appears in 2 to 4 days
infested areas , and
Snakes bites
always remove ticks
Poisonous snakes
immediately
DO NOT always inject
2. Have a partner inspect your back side
venom when they bite or
3. Before entering tick infested area, cover neck , legs, strike a person. However,
back of neck, and arms with an insecticide containing all snakes may carry
Deet 17 tetanus (lockjaw’s); any
one bitten by a snake ,
Treatment
whether poisonous or non poisonous , should immediately
1. Grasp the tick with forceps as close to the skin surface
seeks medical attention
as possible and pull slowly and firmly. Do not twist or
State Disaster Management Authority 56 State Disaster Management Authority 57

--- Page 34 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
l Poison is injected from the venom sacs through to slow the spread of venom through the lymphatics
grooved or hollow fangs. Depending on the species, system by following these steps:
these fangs are either long or short
Check for feeling warmth and color of the limb and
Signals of a possibly venomous snakebite includes: note changes in skin color and temperature
l Fang marks l Place the end of the bandage against the skin and
use overlapping turns
l Local pain and bleeding
l The wrap should cover a long body such as an arms
l Bruising/swelling/redness
or a calf , beginning at the point farthest from the
l Blistering
heart. For a joint , such as the knee or ankle , use
l Infection figure- eight turns to support the joint
Generalized l Check above and below the injury for feeling ,
warmth and color , especially fingers and toes ,
Nausea / vomiting / abdominal pain / weakness /
after you have applied an elastics roller bandage. By
drowsiness
checking before and after bandaging , you may be
l Visual disturbance
able to tell if any tingling or numbness is from the
l Signs of shocks
elastic bandage or the injury.
l Swelling of whole body
l Check the snugness of the bandaging ------a finger
l Pain whole body should easily , but not loosely , pass under the bandage
Treatment l Keep the injured area still and lower than the heart.
The person should walk only if absolutely necessary
l Wash the wound
P Do not apply ice
l Apply an elastic (pressure
immobilization) bandage P Do not cut the wound
State Disaster Management Authority 58 State Disaster Management Authority 59

--- Page 35 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
P Do not apply suction…… Chapter XI- Poisoning
P Do not apply a tourniquent
A poison is any substance that causes injury, illness or
P Do not use electric shock, such as from a
death if it enters the body .
car battery
Types of poisoning
Animal bites
A person can be poisoned by swallowing poison,
The bite of a domestic or wild animal can cause infection
breathing it absorbing it through the skin and by having it
and soft tissue injury. The most serious possible result is rabies.
injected into the body
Rabies is transmitted through saliva of diseased animals such
Swallowed Poisons
as skunks, bats, raccoons, cats, dogs, cattles, and foxes.
Poisons that can be swallowed include foods, such as
Signal of an animal bite include
certain mushrooms, wild berries, shellfish etc: an overdose
l A bite mark,
of drugs; medications such as a high quantity of aspirin;
l Bleeding
household items, such as cleaning products and pesticides
Treatment
Inhaled Poisons
First aid
A person can be poisoned by breating in (inhaling)
(1) Cleanse the wound thoroughly toxic fumes.
with soap
Examples of poisons that can be inhaled include:
(2) Flush it well with water
l Gases, such as:
(3) Cover it with a sterile dressing
P Carbon monoxide from an engine or car
(4) Immobilize the injured arm or leg , if appropriate
exhaust
(5) Transport the casualty immediately to a Medical
P Carbon dioxide from wells and sewers.
Treatment Facilities (MTF)
State Disaster Management Authority 60 State Disaster Management Authority 61

--- Page 36 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
P Chlorine, found in many swimming pools. l Consider no action due to nature of poisoning. Stay
back at safe arrival point
P Nerve gas.
l Call for assistance (make sure EMS have been
l Fumes from:
notified)
P Household products, such as glues and paints.
l Carry out primary assessment, DRS ABCD
Absorbed Poisons
(consider compression only CPR if risk of cross
Poisons that can be absorbed throught the skin come
contamination)
from many sources including plants, such as poison ivy,
l If unresponsive and breathing is adequate, place the
poison oak and poison sumac, and fertilizers and pesticides.
casualty in a stable side position
Injected Poisons
l Try to find out what has been taken, how much and
Injected poisons enter the body through the bites or
when.
stings of insects and animals or through drugs or medications
l Keep any containers of chemicals or medication
injected with a hypodermic needle.
found to show to the ambulance paramedics
The symptoms of poisoning are nausea and vomiting
l Carry out secondary assessment
diarrhea, chest or abdominal pain, trouble breathing,
l Do not induce vomiting, unless instructed from EMS.
sweating, changes in consciousness, seizures, headache,
dizziness, weakness,irregular pupil size,burning or tearing l Water or milk should only be give to casualties that
eyes, abnormal skin color, burns around the lips, tongue or have swallowed corrosive substances (always follow
on the skin. instructions from EMS).
Treatment l Rest and reassure
l Beware of Danger!
State Disaster Management Authority 62 State Disaster Management Authority 63

--- Page 37 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
Chapter XII- Drowning Reference
1. Wilderness and Remote First aid accessed on 27th jan
Saving a drowning person carries risk. Before
2014
swimming out to someone in trouble, be sure you can handle
http://www.redcross.org/images/MEDIA
the situation. Many people drown in the brave effort of trying
C u s t o m P r o d u c t C a t a l o g / m 4 2 4 0 1 9 7
to save someone else because they are not well trained and
WildernessRemoteFirstAid PocketGuide.pdf
have not properly thought through the risks of the situation.
2. First Aid Manual: 2013 accessed on 27th jan 2014
l Get the victim out of the water safely.
http://www.tripleonecare.co.nz/site/tripleonecare/
l If the person is unconscious & is not breathing and
files/Triple%200ne%20Care%20First%20Aid%20
has no pulse. Do CPR.
Manual%20213.pdf
l If victim is breathing and has a pulse, put him or
3. Basic life support accessed on 3rd feb 2014
her in the recovery position.
http://r mujer gsj. Tripod.com/Basic%20Life%20
l Take cold wet clothes off the victim and cover him or
Support.pdf.
her with something warm to prevent hypothermia.
4. ASHI Basic First Aid_SG_Sample, accessed on 3rd feb
2014
http://co.grand.co.us/DocumentCentre/View/555
5. First Aid/Cpr/Aed Participant’s Manual accessed on
3rd feb 2014
http://redcross.org/cpr.
6. First Aid Guide , 2002-2007 Dr.michael stachim, PH.D
State Disaster Management Authority 64 State Disaster Management Authority 65

--- Page 38 ---
BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL BASIC FIRST AID MANUAL
7. First Aid –medical First Responder, Published by:
District Disaster Management Authority, East Khasi
hill District , Shillong Meghalaya in consultation with
Central Training Institute, Civil Defence & Home
Guard , Mawdiangdiang.
8. First Responder Maual , GVK Emergency
Management and Research Institute , secunderabad –
500014,AP,India
9. First Aid Pocket Book, GoI-UNDP,DRMProgramme .
State Disaster Management Authority 66 State Disaster Management Authority 67
