KEY POINTS
After an emergency, your tap water may not be available or safe to use.
Use bottled, boiled, or treated water to avoid getting sick.
Boiling is the best way to kill germs in water.
MORE INFORMATION
For Everyone Health Care Providers Public Health
Overview
After an emergency or disaster—such as a water main break, hurricane, or flood—you can take steps to make sure you have safe water.
If you know or suspect your water is unsafe, do not use that water to:
Drink
Wash dishes
Brush your teeth
Wash or prepare food
Wash your hands
Make ice
Make baby formula
Instead, use bottled, boiled, or treated water for drinking, cooking, and personal hygiene. Follow recommendations from your health department
for boiling or treating your water.
Also consider if there are other sources of safe water in or near your home you could use. Never use water from radiators or boilers that are part
of your home heating system for drinking, cooking, or hygiene. This water could make you sick.

--- Page 2 ---
10/24/25, 10:22 PM How to Make Water Safe in an Emergency | Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH)-related Emergencies and Outbreaks | CDC
Boil
If you don’t have safe bottled water, boil your water to make it safe to drink.
Boiling is the best way to kill germs in water.
Steps for boiling water
If the water is cloudy, first filter it through a clean cloth, paper towel, or coffee filter. Another option is to let it settle. Then, draw off the clear
water and follow the steps below.
1. Bring clear water to a rolling boil for 1 minute (at elevations above 6,500 feet, boil for 3 minutes).
2. Let the boiled water cool.
3. Store the boiled water in clean, sanitized containers with tight covers.
Making boiled water taste better
Improve the flat taste of boiled water by:
Pouring it from one container to another and then letting it stand for a few hours
Adding a pinch of salt for each quart or liter of boiled water
Disinfect
You can kill most germs in water with chemical disinfectants, such as unscented household chlorine bleach, iodine, or chlorine dioxide tablets.
However, disinfectants do not work as well as boiling for killing some germs, including the parasites Cryptosporidium and Giardia.
Steps for using bleach to disinfect water
If the water is cloudy, first filter it through a clean cloth, paper towel, or coffee filter. Another option is to let it settle. Then, draw off the clear
water and follow the steps below.
1. Follow the instructions on the bleach label for disinfecting drinking water. If the label does not have instructions, check the "active ingredient"
on the label to find the bleach's concentration of sodium hypochlorite. In the United States, it will typically be between 5% and 9% sodium
hypochlorite. Then, based on the concentration you have, use the tables below to add the appropriate amount of bleach to the water.
2. Stir the bleach and water mixture well.
3. Let the water stand for at least 30 minutes before you drink it.
4. Store the disinfected water in clean, sanitized containers with tight covers.
See how much bleach to add to different amounts of water in the tables below.
Bleach with a 5% to 9% concentration of sodium hypochlorite
https://www.cdc.gov/water-emergency/about/index.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com 2/6

--- Page 3 ---
10/24/25, 10:22 PM How to Make Water Safe in an Emergency | Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH)-related Emergencies and Outbreaks | CDC
Use the measurements below to make water safe to use. If the water is cloudy, murky, colored, or very cold, add double the amount of bleach
listed below.
If you have a dropper: Add 2 drops of bleach
1 quart or liter of water
If you have something that measures in milliliters (mL): Add 0.1 mL
of bleach
If you have a measuring spoon: Add a tiny amount (too small to
measure)
If you have a dropper: Add 8 drops of bleach
1 gallon of water
If you have something that measures milliliters (mL): Add ½ mL
of bleach
If you have a measuring spoon: Add a little less than ⅛ teaspoon
If you have a dropper: Add 40 drops of bleach
5 gallons of water
If you have something that measures milliliters (mL): Add 2½ mL of
bleach
If you have a measuring spoon: Add ½ teaspoon of bleach
Bleach with a 1% concentration of sodium hypochlorite
Use the measurements below to make water safe to use. If the water is cloudy, murky, colored, or very cold, add double the amount of bleach
listed below.
If you have a dropper: Add 10 drops of bleach
1 quart or liter of water
If you have something that measures milliliters (mL): Add ½ mL
of bleach
If you have a measuring spoon: Add ⅛ teaspoon of bleach
If you have a dropper: Add 40 drops of bleach
1 gallon of water
If you have something that measures milliliters (mL): Add 2½
mL of bleach
If you have a measuring spoon: Add ½ teaspoon of bleach
If you have a dropper: Add 200 drops of bleach
5 gallons of water
If you have something that measures milliliters (mL): Add 12½
mL of bleach
If you have a measuring spoon: Add 2½ teaspoons of bleach
Using chemical tablets or drops to disinfect water
Follow the instructions on the label or package of chlorine dioxide, chlorine, or iodine tablets or drops. Chemical disinfectants are made to
disinfect specific amounts of water.
https://www.cdc.gov/water-emergency/about/index.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com 3/6

--- Page 4 ---
10/24/25, 10:22 PM How to Make Water Safe in an Emergency | Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH)-related Emergencies and Outbreaks | CDC
Chemical disinfectants kill viruses and bacteria, but may not kill parasites.
If Cryptosporidium is in your water
Iodine, tablets with iodine (tetraglycine hydroperiodide), or chlorine tablets kill most germs, but will not kill Cryptosporidium germs. Chlorine
dioxide tablets will kill Cryptosporidium as long as you follow the instructions correctly.

Who should avoid water disinfected with iodine
If you are pregnant, have thyroid problems, or have a hypersensitivity to iodine, avoid drinking water disinfected with iodine. Additionally,
no one should drink water disinfected with iodine for more than a few weeks at a time.
Filter
Portable water filters do not remove all types of germs from water.
Portable filters:
Will not remove viruses
Must have an absolute pore (hole) size of 0.3 micron or smaller to remove bacteria
Must have an absolute pore size of 1 micron or smaller to remove parasites (such as Giardia or Cryptosporidium)
Using a filter
1. Follow the instructions for the water filter you are using.
2. After filtering, add a chemical disinfectant—such as iodine, chlorine, or chlorine dioxide—to the filtered water. The disinfectant will kill any
viruses and bacteria.
Most filters will remove parasites, but not viruses or bacteria.
Using light
UV light
Portable units that deliver ultraviolet (UV) light can kill germs in small amounts of clear water. UV light does not work well in cloudy water
because small particles can block germs from the light.
Using UV light
If the water is cloudy, first filter it through a clean cloth, paper towel, or coffee filter. Another option is to let it settle. Then, draw off the clear
water.
https://www.cdc.gov/water-emergency/about/index.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com 4/6

--- Page 5 ---
10/24/25, 10:22 PM How to Make Water Safe in an Emergency | Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH)-related Emergencies and Outbreaks | CDC
Follow the instructions for the UV light unit to disinfect clear water.
Filter water before using UV light to disinfect it.
Solar disinfection
In emergencies, the sun’s rays can improve the quality of your water by reducing the number of germs in it. Solar disinfection does not work well
in cloudy water because small particles can block germs from the light.
Using solar disinfection
If the water is cloudy, first filter it through a clean cloth, paper towel, or coffee filter. Another option is to let it settle. Then, draw off the clear
water and follow the steps below.
1. Fill clean, clear plastic bottles with clear water.
2. Lay the bottles down on their side and in the sun for 6 hours (if sunny) or 2 days (if cloudy). Laying the bottles down allows the sun’s rays to
kill more germs in the water. You can also lay the bottles on a dark surface to help the sun's rays kill more germs.
