--- Page 1 ---
Until Help Arrives
Contents
You Make a Difference .............................................................................................................................. 2
Call 9-1-1 ................................................................................................................................................... 8
Stay Safe .................................................................................................................................................. 11
Stop the Bleeding .................................................................................................................................... 13
Position the Injured ................................................................................................................................. 17
Provide Comfort ...................................................................................................................................... 19
1
UNTIL HELP ARRIVES Version 1.0

--- Page 2 ---
Until Help Arrives
You Make a Difference
Injuries can happen at any time. In fact, you never
know when you might find yourself in a situation
where someone, a stranger perhaps, needs
immediate medical help for a life-threatening
injury. You are the most important help available to
someone with a serious, life-threatening injury.
When someone experiences a life-threatening
emergency, the first care they can get can be the
difference between life and death.
Over the next 30 minutes, we’ll explain why you
should help, how you can help, different reactions
you might experience in the midst of an
emergency, and how to mentally prepare yourself
to help as much as possible.
The following tells the story of an event that
brought two strangers together. It is a powerful
reminder that at a moment’s notice, any one of us
might find ourselves in a situation where we are the
help until help arrives. In the end, this film calls on
all Americans to remake what it means to be a
bystander. The following is the transcript of the
video entitled, “A Perfect Stranger.”
2
UNTIL HELP ARRIVES Version 1.0

--- Page 3 ---
Until Help Arrives
Kinneil: It was a little strange to sit down to someone that you’ve never met before, and decide that
you’re gonna grab their hand and tell them everything is okay.
Angelia: I screamed. That’s all I remember doing at that moment. I knew I was going to wreck.
Kinneil: I remember feeling like we had to do something immediately right now.
Angelia: The day started out like any other day. It wasn’t cold. It wasn’t hot. My friend called me that
morning and said, “I’m gonna take out my Harley, and you got your new bike, and so let’s just go out
and have some fun.”
Kinneil: All of a sudden, I see the woman on the motorcycle just flying through the air. I just remember
saying, “Stop the car.”
Angelia: I remember getting thrown headfirst over the motorcycle. And I heard them say, “Don’t move.
Please don’t move.” Blood was streaming down and it went on into the cutter. There’s still the mark of
the blood.
Kinneil: And then when we pulled up and saw her, blood was rushing down out of her leg and into the
gutter. My husband’s cousin took his shirt off and immediately started applying pressure to stop the
bleeding.
Angelia: Kinneil was holding my hand. I remember that distinctly. She was saying, “You’re going to be
okay.” And to hear those words was so important.
Dr. Lutz: I really feel bystanders have a responsibility to act. Don’t be afraid. You’re not gonna hurt
yourself. You’re not gonna hurt the patient. All you’ll do is help. Even if it’s just a comforting hand.
Andrew: Doing something is better than doing nothing. That helps us more than they would ever
realize. That can make all the difference between life and death.
Kinneil: If you imagine yourself in a situation where you’ve been in an accident, you’re vulnerable;
you’re frightened, think about what you would want.
End Video.
For more information about Angelia and Kinneil’s back story, go to:
https://community.fema.gov/story/a-perfect-stranger?lang=en_US
3
UNTIL HELP ARRIVES Version 1.0

--- Page 4 ---
Until Help Arrives
If something happens where people are injured,
act quickly and with a purpose. Remember to call
911 as soon as possible. Then, move the injured
away from any remaining danger, and then, do
anything within your ability to keep them alive:
apply pressure to stop bleeding, reposition them
to help them breath, talk to them and provide
comfort if they are conscious.
It's important to note that if you think an injured person is in immediate danger that could result in
additional injuries, try to get them out of harm's way before calling 9-1-1. If you are able, you should
help them and then call, or get someone else to help them or call.
The typical EMS response time is only about 6 to 9
minutes. However, life-threatening injuries can kill
within minutes, before medical responders arrive!
The following is the transcript of the video entitled,
“You are Part of Our Team.”
Dr. E. Reed Smith: Any first responder will tell you
that it is rare, really rare, to show up on any scene-
whether it’s a fire, whether it’s someone sick,
whether it’s a cat in a tree, where someone isn’t
trying to do something. We do a pretty good job as professional medical response; we do a good job
getting there quickly.
But we get there and nothing’s been done. When we get there and there’s been a huge time lag. When
you get there and it’s been 30 minutes, and that person’s now cold and we know that getting
hypothermic, getting cold, when you’re traumatically injured kills you, we know that… If a person’s in a
position where they can’t breathe well , right and they haven’t been getting enough oxygen, that kills
you we know that. 30 minutes is a long time. The person who’s bleeding and continues to bleed and
there’s a giant puddle of blood on the ground which should be inside that person’s body…
So can we keep them alive? Maybe. But it’s going to be way harder if we don’t have the citizen helping
us out. You know it’s a team, we’re a team, we’re here to help you - we need you to help us.
Clare Burley: People are afraid because they don’t have formal training, that they might make a
situation worse. Really it’s very very hard to make the situation worse. If you’re in a situation where
someone is suffering some kind of life threatening emergency, it’s pretty hard to make it worse for them
than it already is. It’s much better to try to do something, you’re very unlikely to cause them harm. So
it’s better to at least give it a shot, it’s a difference between life and death for that person. We’re quick
but we’re not that quick.
4
UNTIL HELP ARRIVES Version 1.0

--- Page 5 ---
Until Help Arrives
Anne Marsh: If people knew that they could intervene and do something immediately, would help
enormous numbers of people. The worst thing you can do is just stand by and do nothing. End of video.
It’s important to note that you won’t get in trouble
for helping! Good Samaritan Laws help protect
those who help until help arrives. State laws
known as “Good Samaritan” laws generally protect
people who provide uncompensated medical care
or assistance during a life-threatening situation.
These laws vary by state, but their shared aim is to
protect people who provide care in a prudent and
reasonable manner to ill or injured persons.
When you call 911, you are starting the first part of
the emergency medical system. The Chain of
Survival is how the emergency medical system
flows to keep people with life-threatening injuries
alive. It starts with YOU.
In a life-threatening emergency, you will
experience physical and psychological effects that
may include distortion of time, distortion of sense
– like having tunnel vision or muffled sounds. Your
adrenaline may kick in and activate your fight or
flight response, meaning you may experience a
change in body temperature, feel shaky, and/or
lose control of other body functions. You may also
feel nauseous. These are all normal reactions to
stress, and most people will experience them. In an emergency, your brain will search your previous
experiences for an anchor that tells it how to respond. Training, including mentally rehearsing how you
would react, provides a hook for your brain and speeds your assessment process, making your response
faster.
5
UNTIL HELP ARRIVES Version 1.0

--- Page 6 ---
Until Help Arrives
Professional first responders train regularly to
make their reactions to emergencies second
nature; many report doing their jobs during a crisis
‘without thinking about it.’ Even the process of
talking through how you would respond will
improve your response time; talk with your family,
friends, and workers about how you would
respond in certain situations.
Let’s see what you remember. We discussed what
you should do when you arrive at the scene of a
life-threatening situation. Select the best answers
for the following scenarios.
There’s been a car accident. It looks like people are
injured. A conscious victim is bleeding in front of
you. What should you do? Run away to safety? Call
911? Go find somebody else to help? The correct
answer is call 911.
You’ve stopped the flow of blood, but there are
still no first responders around…you are starting to
feel nervous and doubting yourself. What should
you do? Call for the assistance of someone else,
you need to get a clear head first? Since the
bleeding has stopped, run away and look for help?
Continue working with the injured person, realizing
this is a normal reaction to stress? The correct
answer is continue working with the injured
person, realizing this is a normal reaction to stress.
You just learned why and how you should help
when you encounter someone who has been
injured. Kinneil didn’t just stand by, she cared
enough to stop and provide a comforting hand and
reassuring voice. You can do the same thing.
Remember, you may be the only help available to
someone with a serious, life-threatening injury.
6
UNTIL HELP ARRIVES Version 1.0

--- Page 7 ---
Until Help Arrives
Over the next several minutes, we’ll review ways
you can help. Of course, always call 9-1-1. Keep in
mind your safety and the safety of the injured. If
someone is bleeding, take action to stop the
bleeding. You may need to position the injured so
they can breathe more easily. And finally,
providing comfort and support can be just as
valuable as providing medical support.
End of Topic.
7
UNTIL HELP ARRIVES Version 1.0

--- Page 8 ---
Until Help Arrives
Call 9-1-1
Let’s start with calling 9-1-1. We all think we know
how to call 9-1-1 during an emergency, but have
you ever really had to do it? You might be
surprised at how stressful it can be. Here are some
tips for how to do it well so the operators can get
the right kind help to you as soon as possible.
This topic will go over the questions that a 911
operator will ask and will explain how you can
work together with your operator to provide the
best possible response.
No matter what, you should ALWAYS call 911! 911
operators are highly trained and will help you work
through the situation, tell you what to do to help,
help you to focus, and instruct you on how to be as
safe as possible. Always make the call…even if you
think others may have done it already.
When you make a 911 call, it’s normal to feel
stressed; you might be surprised to find that this
happens even when you practice! Take a deep
breath and lean on the operator. They will ask you
specific questions that help them send the right
type of help to you. Depending on the situation,
they may give you specific instructions. Follow
their lead and let them coach you!
8
UNTIL HELP ARRIVES Version 1.0

--- Page 9 ---
Until Help Arrives
Operators may ask you some common types of
questions about where you are, what is happening,
who else is involved, and if the emergency is still
happening, for example, if there is still a fire in the
building or if there is a shooter nearby. It’s ok if
you don’t know the answer, don’t worry about
knowing exactly what to say or sounding silly in
front of the operator. Just give them as much
specific information as you can, for example, if you
are in a building, what floor number are you on, are you nearby any signs or other landmarks that will
help responders to find you? This type of information can be really important to the people coming to
help you.
Let’s see what you remember. We just discussed
the importance of calling 9-1-1. Use the
information you learned to select the best answers
for the following scenarios.
In which situation should you call 9-1-1?
Scenario 1, you see a car crashed into a telephone
pole with someone unconscious.
Scenario 2, you see someone standing around their
car which has had its tires stolen.
The correct answer is scenario 1- when you see
someone unconscious after an accident.
What is the first question you should be prepared
to answer from the 911 operator? A. How old are
you? B. Where is your emergency? C. Can you get
someone else to help? The correct answer is B,
where is your emergency?
The operator is asking you several questions that
you aren’t able to answer. You should: A. Say you
can’t help and that you are going to try to find
someone else to give the phone to. B. Explain to
the operator that they are asking too many
questions and that you can’t answer them. C. Take
a deep breath, and provide as much information as
you can…no matter how non-specific it may be.
The correct answer is C.
9
UNTIL HELP ARRIVES Version 1.0

--- Page 10 ---
Until Help Arrives
You just learned why it’s important to call 9-1-1.
One of the best things you can do when you come
upon what may be a life-threatening situation, is to
call. Stay on the line with the operator, and answer
their questions as calmly as you can. 9-1-1
Operators will help you get the help you need.
End of Topic.
10
UNTIL HELP ARRIVES Version 1.0

--- Page 11 ---
Until Help Arrives
Stay Safe
During a life threatening situation, you need to be
aware of what’s happening around you, before you
try to offer assistance. You can’t help anyone if you
get hurt yourself.
In this topic, you’ll get some tips on how to
approach an emergency and what to keep an eye
out for when you are helping others.
Remember that you’ll probably feel the effects of
stress when dealing with an emergency….so it’s
very important pause, and try to gather as much
information as you can using all your senses. For
example…what do you see? What’s happening
around you? What do you hear? Any voices,
screams, noises that cause concern? And what do
you smell? Any fumes or chemical smells?
It’s important to help when you can, but it’s also
important to be as safe as possible. It all comes
down to using your best judgement before taking
action! You want to decide if you are safer where
you are or somewhere else, and if you do decide
to leave, if you need to consider if you can take
someone else with you.
11
UNTIL HELP ARRIVES Version 1.0

--- Page 12 ---
Until Help Arrives
If you decide to go, and you want to take an
injured person with you to get them away from
continuing danger, you want to move smartly.
What does that mean? It means using what’s
around you- like other people, a cart or vehicle,
chairs, blankets, etc. OR using a smart carry- like
the ones pictured. You want to use the least
amount of energy possible, especially if you need
to move multiple people.
Remember, if someone is in grave danger, the goal is to get them away from that danger by whatever
means possible, so when in doubt, do whatever you can. Think about someone lying in the middle of a
busy street; if they stay there, they are in great danger of being hit by a car so you want to get them out
of traffic however you can, including dragging them if that’s the best way to get them off to the side of
the road. Once they are safe, call 9-1-1.
Let’s see what you remember. Earlier we had you
explore a flow chart of questions to ask yourself
prior to providing care. Work through the flowchart
from left to right. Based on the “yes” or “no”
responses to the questions you should ask, choose”
Leave,” or “stay.”
You have learned why it’s important to be aware of
your surroundings during a life threatening
situation. Remember to keep yourself safe, so that
you are able to help others.
End of Topic.
12
UNTIL HELP ARRIVES Version 1.0

--- Page 13 ---
Until Help Arrives
Stop the Bleeding
Bleeding is a fast killer; one of the easiest and most
important things to do is to stop bleeding as
quickly as possible.
The following topic discusses life-threatening
bleeding and how to control it; either by applying
firm, steady pressure or if necessary, using a
tourniquet.
Transcription of video, “Time is Crucial”.
Dr. E. Reed Smith: If you see somebody and you’re
like “Wow that’s a lot of blood!” or “Wow that’s a
lot of bleeding!” you should do something. That’s
significant bleeding. What happens is it’s all about
the amount of blood loss. We have a set amount of
blood in our bodies based upon your size and
other things, generally 5 liters, 5-6 liters of blood.
We know from medical science and studies at what point your body starts to have not enough blood. To
the point where it’s causing physiologic problems, it’s causing problems. That starts around 500cc or
about half a liter to a liter of blood. If you lost 2 liters of blood, and 3-5 minutes is pretty fast to lose that
amount, it’s more like 10-15 minutes in bad bleeds. Once you get to that point and beyond that,
potentially, you can go into a state of what we call irreversible shock. And essentially the tank doesn’t
have enough gas in it to keep the engine running.
13
UNTIL HELP ARRIVES Version 1.0

--- Page 14 ---
Until Help Arrives
Irreversible shock is irreversible. Which means it doesn’t matter what we do. It doesn’t matter how good
your trauma center is, it doesn’t matter how good your doctors are, it doesn’t matter how good your
paramedics are, it doesn’t matter. Once you start that physiologic process of irreversible shock, it
continues. We can’t break that cycle, and you will die, or that person will die. The point- the only
treatment for irreversible shock is prevention of irreversible shock. Don’t let them get to that point. That
blood belongs in the body; it doesn’t belong on the street. It belongs in the body, so let’s keep it there.
No matter how we do it, let’s keep it there. End of Video.
Thanks Dr. Smith! When someone is bleeding badly,
you need to stop the bleeding right away so they
don’t go into shock. When your body loses about
half its blood volume, about the amount pictured in
these liter bottles, a person WILL die, even if you
eventually make it to a hospital and receive medical
care. You can lose that amount of blood within
minutes so every drop of blood counts. So how can
you stop the bleed?
Transcription of video, “How Do You Stop The
Bleeding?”
Dr. E. Reed Smith: Pressure stops bleeding, it’s one
of those things in medicine we’ve known a long
time. It’s one of the things that, it’s a truth in
medicine that’s true today and it’ll be true in a
hundred years. Pressure stops bleeding. So what we
really want the citizen to do, how do you stop
bleeding if you’re on the side of the road or in the middle of the woods and waiting for someone to
come help you? Is you have to put pressure on the bleeding. There are a couple things about that that
people need to understand.
Number one: You got to understand a little about the anatomy. The major blood vessels, the ones that’ll
cause bleeding to the point where you’re going to die, are always deep under the skin near the bone. So
there always down and they run along major bones. That means you have to apply a lot of pressure. It’s
not just a little bit of pressure; it’s a significant amount of pressure.
Number two: It may cause some discomfort and that’s okay, you’re not doing any damage, you’re not
hurting them; you’re actually saving them.
14
UNTIL HELP ARRIVES Version 1.0

--- Page 15 ---
Until Help Arrives
And number three: You have to hold it for a long time. You have to make sure you’re holding pressure
for long enough that the clotting process starts. How long is that pressure? As long as you can- until we
get there or you can’t hold it anymore. What people have a tendency to do is they want to come up and
put a bandage on a bleeding wound. A bandage doesn’t stop bleeding; all it does is soak up blood. And
again, that blood that it’s soaking up into that bandage should be in your body, it shouldn’t be being
soaked up into that bandage; we want it to stop. So before you put the bandage on, before you make
something look pretty, you got to put pressure on it. And that pressure is what works.
If you don’t get the bleeding stopped, even if you slowed the bleeding, maybe you buy that person
enough time until we can get there and completely control the bleeding. And then some bleeding can’t
be controlled, the wounds are too big, the artery is too large, the vein to too large… that’s where we
look at tourniquets. And even still, if you have a wound that needs a tourniquet, I want to put pressure
on it while I’m getting the tourniquet in place. Because if you’re free flowing blood while I’m working on
getting my tourniquet, you’re dying while I’m getting my tourniquet in place. We want to stop the dying.
We stop the dying by stopping the bleeding with pressure and then we apply the tourniquet which then
further controls it. That’s the key. End of Video
Thanks again Dr. Smith. Just for review, here are
the steps to control bleeding. First, you find the
source of the bleed. It may come from one place, or
multiple wounds. Second, if you have something to
put in between the blood and your hands, like a
pair of gloves, a piece of cloth, or even a plastic
bag, you should use it to keep things as sanitary as
possible. Third, apply firm, steady pressure directly
on the source of the bleed. Push hard to stop or
slow down the bleeding, even if it’s painful to the person you are helping! Finally, keep pressure until
EMS arrives and takes over; use other people to help you if you get tired.
Think of the tourniquet as another way to apply
firm, steady pressure when the injury is to an arm
or leg, and the bleeding is so severe it cannot be
controlled otherwise. If you have access to a
tourniquet, you should practice using it (carefully)
on a friend so you are familiar with it.
15
UNTIL HELP ARRIVES Version 1.0

--- Page 16 ---
Until Help Arrives
This is a step-by-step list on how to use a tourniquet.
Let’s see what you remember. Dr. Smith discussed
why it’s so important to stop the bleeding. Which of
the following items would you use to stop heavy
bleeding if a tourniquet is not appropriate or
available? A coat? A soft toy? A shirt? The correct
answer is a shirt.
We also learned that a tourniquet is a way to
provide steady pressure to a bleed when it cannot
be controlled otherwise. In order to slow the rate of
the bleed, what is the best place for the application
of a tourniquet if the wound is located near the
knee? On the wound? Above the wound? Below the
wound? The correct answer is above the wound.
You have learned why it’s important to stop the
bleeding and how you can stop the bleeding. You
also heard Dr. Smith talk about how quickly blood
loss occurs and what happens when somebody loses
too much blood. Remember to do what you can to
keep blood in the body, hopefully preventing
irreversible shock. End of Topic
16
UNTIL HELP ARRIVES Version 1.0

--- Page 17 ---
Until Help Arrives
Position the Injured
Positioning an injured person correctly and
comfortably is one of the easy ways you can help
keep someone alive
This topic shows you how to position someone to
help them breathe as easily as possible whether
they are conscious or unconscious.
We’ve all been told that when someone is sick,
they should lie down but actually, if someone is
conscious, meaning awake and probably talking to
you, let them sit or lie however they feel best. The
body will automatically go to the best position
when someone is alert. If they are struggling to
move, simply help them to a more comfortable
position. Don’t force them to lie down or sit up,
especially if they are trying to re-position
themselves!
What should you do if the person is unconscious,
or not awake and able to respond? If the injured
person is breathing, move them into the recovery
position. If they aren’t breathing, and you are able,
remove obstructions and perform CPR.
17
UNTIL HELP ARRIVES Version 1.0

--- Page 18 ---
Until Help Arrives
If you are helping an unconscious person, you
should move them into what’s call the “recovery
position.” The recovery position is a way to place
the body on its side to keep the airway open and
prevent choking.
Let’s see what remember. We discussed the
importance of moving an unconscious person to
the recovery position. Select the best position for
the unconscious person in the following scenario.
What is the correct position to place a seriously
injured person in? Rotate injured person onto side,
Flip injured person flat on stomach, or attempt to
sit the injured person up. The correct answer is to
rotate injured person onto side.
You have learned how to position both a conscious
and unconscious person. The most important thing
to remember is to put them in a position that will
help them breath as easily as possible.
End of topic.
18
UNTIL HELP ARRIVES Version 1.0

--- Page 19 ---
Until Help Arrives
Provide Comfort
Offering comfort and kind, encouraging words can
be just as valuable as offering medical support.
Survivors often remember the words and support
given by those around them.
This topic will give you some tips on how to best
provide comfort to people who are seriously
injured as well as those around them.
Any time you help someone; always start by asking
them if you can help. You might start by saying
your name and asking “How can I help?”, “What do
you need?”, or “What happened?” Try to keep
them calm and focused on you. Tell them what you
currently know and what is going to happen next.
Also help them understand what’s being done to
assist or treat them if someone is attending to
them.
If it’s comfortable for you, it’s also appropriate to
offer a hand to hold or a shoulder to lean against.
Maintain eye contract, be patient and
understanding, and if you have to move on to
provide aid to another person, tell them help is
coming.
19
UNTIL HELP ARRIVES Version 1.0

--- Page 20 ---
Until Help Arrives
When people have serious injuries, it is very
important to keep them warm. Cover the person
you are helping up and if you can, put something
between them and the ground.
Even if it seems warm out to you, the injured
person may be losing body heat which can lead to
hypothermia. Keeping an injured person warm
improves blood clotting, reduces stress and lowers
the risk of shock. It also makes them more
comfortable.
You might find yourself needing to help a child or
someone with access and functional needs. In
general, when addressing children, try to sit or
kneel at eye level and explain things to them in a
way they can understand.
People with access and functional needs may
need help moving or communicating; be patient
and understanding and let them tell you how you
can best help. You can learn how more about
providing compassionate support by reviewing
Psychological First Aid (PFA).
http://emergency.cdc.gov/mentalhealth/
Let’s see what you remember. We discussed the
various ways you can provide comfort. Use the
information you learned to select the best
answers for the following scenarios.
Scenario 1, you see an injured, conscious person
propped up against a vehicle. From the following
options, select the best thing to say to this person.
Is there anything I can do to help? Your injury
looks serious; I need to get a doctor over here really fast. I’m going to go find somebody to help. The
correct answer is the first option; ask them if there is anything you can do to help.
20
UNTIL HELP ARRIVES Version 1.0

--- Page 21 ---
Until Help Arrives
Scenario 2, the injured person becomes
unresponsive. Of the following items available,
select the most appropriate to help. Bottle of
water, blanket, or granola bar. The correct answer
is blanket.
You have learned that providing comfort can be
just as valuable as providing medical support. Talk
to the injured, ask them questions, hold their hand
if appropriate. Also remember to keep them
warm. These simple things can help someone
survive. End of Topic.
You’ve just heard about the different ways that
you can assist until professional help arrives. By
making the decision to stay and help, and then
doing simple things such as, call 9-1-1, stay safe,
stop the bleed, position the injured, and provide
comfort, you can be the difference between life
and death. Thanks for watching! You will now be
lead to your certificate where you can also learn
more about what to do Until Help Arrives!
End of topic.
Please go here (https://community.fema.gov/until-help-arrives/wbt-student-post-course) for your
certificate. End of Course.
21
UNTIL HELP ARRIVES Version 1.0
